README.md, before:


# foo_midi

[foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/releases) is a [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/) component that adds playback of MIDI files to foobar2000.

It is based on [foo_midi](https://gitlab.com/kode54/foo_midi) by [kode54](https://gitlab.com/kode54).

## Features

- Decodes General MIDI files (.MID, .MIDI, .RMI, .KAR) and several MIDI based formats. (.MIDS, .MDS, .HMI, .HMP, .MUS, .XMI, .XFM, .LDS, .RCP, .R36, .G18, .G36, .XMF/.MXMF, .MMF).
- Supports several synthesizers, several of which do not require any additional files to play back music. The bundled synthesizers which do not require additional files may sound rather basic, though.
- Supports FluidSynth SoundFont (.sf2) based synthesizer, including support for the newer compressed format. (.sf3). SoundFonts may be loaded in a simple, or even complex setup, using either basic .sflist text files encoded in UTF-8 format, but for now, it only supports a bare list of files.
- Supports 32 and 64-bit VST instruments.
- Supports dark mode.

## Requirements

- [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/download) v2.0 or later (32 or 64-bit). ![foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/button-small.png)
- Tested on Microsoft Windows 10 and later.

## Getting started

- Double-click `foo_midi.fbk2-component`.

or

- Import `foo_midi.fbk2-component` into foobar2000 using the "*File / Preferences / Components / Install...*" menu item.

## Usage

You can find the user guide [here](docs/README.md).

## Developing

### Requirements

To build the code you need:

- [Microsoft Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) or later
- [foobar2000 SDK](https://www.foobar2000.org/SDK) 2025-03-07
- [Windows Template Library (WTL)](https://github.com/Win32-WTL/WTL) 10.0.10320

The following libraries are included in the code:

- [BASS](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.17
  - [BASSFLAC](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.5.5
  - [BASSMIDI](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.15.3
  - [BASSWV](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.7.4
  - [BASSOPUS](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.3.0
  - [BASSMPC](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.1.2
- [FluidSynth](https://github.com/FluidSynth/fluidsynth/) 2.4.7
- [LibADLMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libADLMIDI) 1.6.1, Yamaha YMF262 and CT1747 (OPL3)
- [LibOPNMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libOPNMIDI) 1.6.1, Yamaha YM2612 (OPN2), Yamaha YM2608 (OPNA), Yamaha YM3438 (OPN2C) and YMF276 (OPN2L).
- [LibEMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libEDMIDI), Yamaha (OPLL), PSG and SCC
- [LibMT32Emu](https://github.com/munt/munt) 2.7.2, Roland MT-32, CM-32L and LAPC-I synthesiser modules
- [Nuked-OPL3](https://github.com/nukeykt/Nuked-OPL3), Yamaha YMF262 and CT1747 (OPL3)
- [zlib](https://www.zlib.net/) 1.3.1

To create the deployment package you need:

- [PowerShell 7.2](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell) or later

### Setup

Create the following directory structure:

    3rdParty
        WTL10_10320
    bin
        x86
    foo_midi
    out
    sdk

- `3rdParty/WTL10_10320` contains [Windows Template Library (WTL)](https://github.com/Win32-WTL/WTL).
- `bin` contains a portable version of foobar2000 64-bit for debugging purposes.
- `bin/x86` contains a portable version of foobar2000 32-bit for debugging purposes.
- `foo_midi` contains the [Git](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi) repository.
- `out` receives a deployable version of the component.
- `sdk` contains the [foobar2000 SDK](https://www.foobar2000.org/SDK).

Issue the following commands:

> git clone --recurse [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi)  
> cd foo_midi  
> git submodule update --recursive --init

### Building

Open `foo_midi.sln` with Visual Studio and build the solution.

### Packaging

To create the component first build the x64 configuration and next the x86 configuration.

## Change Log

v3.2.2.1, 2025-09-30

- Fixed: LibOPNMIDI did not include the new low-level emulators due to a build configuration error.

You can read the full history [here](docs/History.md).

## Acknowledgements / Credits

- Peter Pawlowski for the [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/) audio player. ![foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/button-small.png)
- [kode54](https://gitlab.com/kode54/) for the original [foo_midi](https://gitlab.com/kode54/foo_midi) component.
- [Un4seen Developments](https://www.un4seen.com/) for the BASS audio library.
- [Munt](https://github.com/munt/munt/) for a multi-platform software synthesiser emulating pre-GM MIDI devices such as the Roland MT-32, CM-32L, CM-64 and LAPC-I.
- [Alexey Khokholov (Nuke.YKT)](http://nukeykt.retrohost.net/) for [Nuked OPL3](https://github.com/nukeykt/Nuked-OPL3).
- [Vitaly Novichkov](https://github.com/Wohlstand) for [libADLMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libADLMIDI), [libOPNMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libOPNMIDI) and [libEDMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libEDMIDI).
- [Mitsutaka Okazaki](https://github.com/Wohlstand/scc) for Emu de MIDI.
- [arch21](https://hydrogenaud.io/index.php?action=profile;u=123058) for testing and pointing me in the right direction with Secret Sauce and SF3 SoundFonts.
- Tom Moebert for [FluidSynth](https://www.fluidsynth.org/).
- [Valley Bell](https://github.com/ValleyBell) for [MidiConverters](https://github.com/ValleyBell/MidiConverters).
- [Jean-loup Gailly](http://gailly.net/) and [Mark Adler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Adler) for [zlib](https://www.zlib.net/).
- [Spessasus](https://github.com/spessasus) for testing, advice and [SpessaSynth](https://github.com/spessasus/SpessaSynth).
- [Zoltán Bacskó](https://github.com/Falcosoft) for testing, advice and [MIDI Player](https://www.vogons.org/viewtopic.php?f=5&t=48207).
- [Murachue](https://murachue.sytes.net/web/) for [MMFTool](https://murachue.sytes.net/web/softlist.cgi?mode=desc&title=mmftool).
- [yuno (Yoshio Uno)](yuno@users.sourceforge.jp) for [fmmidi](http://milkpot.sakura.ne.jp/fmmidi/).
- [John Novak](https://github.com/johnnovak) for [Nuked-SC55-CLAP](https://github.com/johnnovak/Nuked-SC55-CLAP).

## Links

ðŸŒ Home page: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi)  
ðŸŒ Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues)  
ðŸŒ Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues)  

## License

![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-yellow.svg)

Commit message:

Allow negative values for BASSMIDI gain.

README.md, after:


# foo_midi

[foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/releases) is a [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/) component that adds playback of MIDI files to foobar2000.

It is based on [foo_midi](https://gitlab.com/kode54/foo_midi) by [kode54](https://gitlab.com/kode54).

## Features

- Decodes General MIDI files (.MID, .MIDI, .RMI, .KAR) and several MIDI based formats. (.MIDS, .MDS, .HMI, .HMP, .MUS, .XMI, .XFM, .LDS, .RCP, .R36, .G18, .G36, .XMF/.MXMF, .MMF).
- Supports several synthesizers, several of which do not require any additional files to play back music. The bundled synthesizers which do not require additional files may sound rather basic, though.
- Supports FluidSynth SoundFont (.sf2) based synthesizer, including support for the newer compressed format. (.sf3). SoundFonts may be loaded in a simple, or even complex setup, using either basic .sflist text files encoded in UTF-8 format, but for now, it only supports a bare list of files.
- Supports 32 and 64-bit VST instruments.
- Supports dark mode.

## Requirements

- [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/download) v2.0 or later (32 or 64-bit). ![foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/button-small.png)
- Tested on Microsoft Windows 10 and later.

## Getting started

- Double-click `foo_midi.fbk2-component`.

or

- Import `foo_midi.fbk2-component` into foobar2000 using the "*File / Preferences / Components / Install...*" menu item.

## Usage

You can find the user guide [here](docs/README.md).

## Developing

### Requirements

To build the code you need:

- [Microsoft Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) or later
- [foobar2000 SDK](https://www.foobar2000.org/SDK) 2025-03-07
- [Windows Template Library (WTL)](https://github.com/Win32-WTL/WTL) 10.0.10320

The following libraries are included in the code:

- [BASS](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.17
  - [BASSFLAC](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.5.5
  - [BASSMIDI](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.15.3
  - [BASSWV](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.7.4
  - [BASSOPUS](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.3.0
  - [BASSMPC](https://www.un4seen.com/) 2.4.1.2
- [FluidSynth](https://github.com/FluidSynth/fluidsynth/) 2.4.7
- [LibADLMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libADLMIDI) 1.6.1, Yamaha YMF262 and CT1747 (OPL3)
- [LibOPNMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libOPNMIDI) 1.6.1, Yamaha YM2612 (OPN2), Yamaha YM2608 (OPNA), Yamaha YM3438 (OPN2C) and YMF276 (OPN2L).
- [LibEMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libEDMIDI), Yamaha (OPLL), PSG and SCC
- [LibMT32Emu](https://github.com/munt/munt) 2.7.2, Roland MT-32, CM-32L and LAPC-I synthesiser modules
- [Nuked-OPL3](https://github.com/nukeykt/Nuked-OPL3), Yamaha YMF262 and CT1747 (OPL3)
- [zlib](https://www.zlib.net/) 1.3.1

To create the deployment package you need:

- [PowerShell 7.2](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell) or later

### Setup

Create the following directory structure:

    3rdParty
        WTL10_10320
    bin
    bin.x86
    foo_midi
    out
    sdk

- `3rdParty/WTL10_10320` contains [Windows Template Library (WTL)](https://github.com/Win32-WTL/WTL).
- `bin` contains a portable version of foobar2000 64-bit for debugging purposes.
- `bin/x86` contains a portable version of foobar2000 32-bit for debugging purposes.
- `foo_midi` contains the [Git](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi) repository.
- `out` receives a deployable version of the component.
- `sdk` contains the [foobar2000 SDK](https://www.foobar2000.org/SDK).

Issue the following commands:

> git clone --recurse [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi)  
> cd foo_midi  
> git submodule update --recursive --init

### Building

Open `foo_midi.sln` with Visual Studio and build the solution.

### Packaging

To create the component first build the x64 configuration and next the x86 configuration.

## Change Log

v3.2.3.0, 2025-10-xx

- Fixed: The preferences dialog accepts negative BASS MIDI gain values. The valid range is -1.0 (Silence) to 2.0. This already worked for JSON soundfont lists.
- Improved: Soundfonts in a JSON soundfont list that not specify their own gain value will also use the gain value from the preferences. Soundfonts in a text soundfont list ignore this value since they have no way to override it.

You can read the full history [here](docs/History.md).

## Acknowledgements / Credits

- Peter Pawlowski for the [foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/) audio player. ![foobar2000](https://www.foobar2000.org/button-small.png)
- [kode54](https://gitlab.com/kode54/) for the original [foo_midi](https://gitlab.com/kode54/foo_midi) component.
- [Un4seen Developments](https://www.un4seen.com/) for the BASS audio library.
- [Munt](https://github.com/munt/munt/) for a multi-platform software synthesiser emulating pre-GM MIDI devices such as the Roland MT-32, CM-32L, CM-64 and LAPC-I.
- [Alexey Khokholov (Nuke.YKT)](http://nukeykt.retrohost.net/) for [Nuked OPL3](https://github.com/nukeykt/Nuked-OPL3).
- [Vitaly Novichkov](https://github.com/Wohlstand) for [libADLMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libADLMIDI), [libOPNMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libOPNMIDI) and [libEDMIDI](https://github.com/Wohlstand/libEDMIDI).
- [Mitsutaka Okazaki](https://github.com/Wohlstand/scc) for Emu de MIDI.
- [arch21](https://hydrogenaud.io/index.php?action=profile;u=123058) for testing and pointing me in the right direction with Secret Sauce and SF3 SoundFonts.
- Tom Moebert for [FluidSynth](https://www.fluidsynth.org/).
- [Valley Bell](https://github.com/ValleyBell) for [MidiConverters](https://github.com/ValleyBell/MidiConverters).
- [Jean-loup Gailly](http://gailly.net/) and [Mark Adler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Adler) for [zlib](https://www.zlib.net/).
- [Spessasus](https://github.com/spessasus) for testing, advice and [SpessaSynth](https://github.com/spessasus/SpessaSynth).
- [Zoltán Bacskó](https://github.com/Falcosoft) for testing, advice and [MIDI Player](https://www.vogons.org/viewtopic.php?f=5&t=48207).
- [Murachue](https://murachue.sytes.net/web/) for [MMFTool](https://murachue.sytes.net/web/softlist.cgi?mode=desc&title=mmftool).
- [yuno (Yoshio Uno)](yuno@users.sourceforge.jp) for [fmmidi](http://milkpot.sakura.ne.jp/fmmidi/).
- [John Novak](https://github.com/johnnovak) for [Nuked-SC55-CLAP](https://github.com/johnnovak/Nuked-SC55-CLAP).

## Links

ðŸŒ Home page: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi)  
ðŸŒ Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues)  
ðŸŒ Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/foo_midi/issues)  

## License

![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-yellow.svg)
