3rdParty/libmsc/README.md, before:


# libmsc

[libmsc](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc) is a library with support classes and functions.

## Features

## Requirements

* Tested on Microsoft Windows 11.

## Getting started

## Developing

To build the code you need:

* [Microsoft Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) or later

## Change Log

v0.1.0.0, 2025-09-01, *"A beginning is a very delicate time."*

* Initial release.

## Acknowledgements / Credits

* [Steffen SchÃƒÂ¼mann](mailto:s.schuemann@pobox.com) for ghc::filesystem.[](// https://github.com/gulrak/filesystem )

## Reference Material

* [The Wonderfully Terrible World of C and C++ Encoding APIs (with Some Rust)](https://thephd.dev/the-c-c++-rust-string-text-encoding-api-landscape)
* [cuneicode, and the Future of Text in C](https://thephd.dev/cuneicode-and-the-future-of-text-in-c)
* [Windows Command-Line: Unicode and UTF-8 Output Text Buffer](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/windows-command-line-unicode-and-utf-8-output-text-buffer/)
* [UTF-8 Everywhere](https://utf8everywhere.org/)

## Test Material

## Links

* Home page: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc)
* Repository: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc.git](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc.git)
* Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc/issues)

## License

![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-yellow.svg)

Commit message:

Removed use of ghc::filesystem

3rdParty/libmsc/README.md, after:


# libmsc

[libmsc](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc) is a library with support classes and functions.

## Features

## Requirements

* Tested on Microsoft Windows 11.

## Getting started

## Developing

To build the code you need:

* [Microsoft Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) or later

## Change Log

v0.1.0.1, 2025-09-16

- Removed ghc::filesystem due to compatibility issues with the foobar2000 SDK.

v0.1.0.0, 2025-09-01, *"A beginning is a very delicate time."*

- Initial release.

## Acknowledgements / Credits

## Reference Material

* [The Wonderfully Terrible World of C and C++ Encoding APIs (with Some Rust)](https://thephd.dev/the-c-c++-rust-string-text-encoding-api-landscape)
* [cuneicode, and the Future of Text in C](https://thephd.dev/cuneicode-and-the-future-of-text-in-c)
* [Windows Command-Line: Unicode and UTF-8 Output Text Buffer](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/commandline/windows-command-line-unicode-and-utf-8-output-text-buffer/)
* [UTF-8 Everywhere](https://utf8everywhere.org/)

## Test Material

## Links

* Home page: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc)
* Repository: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc.git](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc.git)
* Issue tracker: [https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc/issues](https://github.com/stuerp/libmsc/issues)

## License

![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-yellow.svg)
